Description of modernization in winforms code-behind generation in the VS 2022 17.5 Preview3 (#8483)
dotnet/winforms: docs/designer/modernization-code-behind-generation-OOP-designer.md

> # Modernization of WinForms code behind in Out-of-Process WinForms designer

Author: Roslyn generates event handlers as well

> WinForms designer saves visual representations of user controls or forms on the designer surface to code behind file(Form1.designer.cs or Form1.designer.vb). Control instances that developer sees on the design surface are represented as a CodeDOM tree ([Using the CodeDOM - .NET Framework | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/framework/reflection-and-codedom/using-the-codedom)), that tree is saved to the generated code behind file. We call this feature design time serialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WinForms designer saves visual representations of user controls or forms on the designer surface to code behind file(Form1.designer.cs or Form1.designer.vb). Control instances that developer sees on the design surface are represented as a CodeDOM tree ([Using the CodeDOM - .NET Framework | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/framework/reflection-and-codedom/using-the-codedom)), that tree is saved to the generated code behind file in the `InitializeComponent` method. We call this feature design time serialization.
```

> WinForms designer saves visual representations of user controls or forms on the designer surface to code behind file(Form1.designer.cs or Form1.designer.vb). Control instances that developer sees on the design surface are represented as a CodeDOM tree ([Using the CodeDOM - .NET Framework | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/framework/reflection-and-codedom/using-the-codedom)), that tree is saved to the generated code behind file. We call this feature design time serialization.

Author: Will take capitalization and emphasis changes, thanks.

> WinForms designer saves visual representations of user controls or forms on the designer surface to code behind file(Form1.designer.cs or Form1.designer.vb). Control instances that developer sees on the design surface are represented as a CodeDOM tree ([Using the CodeDOM - .NET Framework | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/framework/reflection-and-codedom/using-the-codedom)), that tree is saved to the generated code behind file. We call this feature design time serialization.

Author: picked up the article fixes, but kept `code-behind`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Starting in Visual Studio 17.5 Preview 3 you will begin to see changes in how we serialize code into `InitializeComponent`. This blog post explains what those changes are, why you should keep them, and why it represents a step forward in the modernization of WinForms. We have worked hard to ensure that you can take projects between this version of Visual Studio and earlier versions. Someday in the future, we may build on the improvements in our serialization to enable performance enhancements and new feature capabilities. These potential future investments may break the backwards compatibility with earlier VS version - but we will be sure to inform our developers well ahead of such changes so that you can prepare. 

```

> Up until Visual Studio 2022 v17.5 Preview 3,  COM-based CodeModel interfaces ([CodeModel Interface (EnvDTE) | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/envdte.codemodel?view=visualstudiosdk-2022)) were used to write code into the editor's buffer as well as to generate CodeDOM from the source code when designer was loading.  This COM object was accessible from the main thread only, and prevented parallelization in source code processing. Also it did not support some of the newer language features, for example the `nameof()` expression. We are planning to build upon this foundation in the future releases. Code behind generated by the older releases can be loaded into Preview 3 or later and will work as expected. Code behind generated by Preview 3 can be loaded in the previous releases of the Visual Studio, but we are considering generating newer languages features that are not supported by the previous versions.  

Author: I'm keeping ` | Microsoft Learn` because it explains the source of this link.

> Up until Visual Studio 2022 v17.5 Preview 3,  COM-based CodeModel interfaces ([CodeModel Interface (EnvDTE) | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/envdte.codemodel?view=visualstudiosdk-2022)) were used to write code into the editor's buffer as well as to generate CodeDOM from the source code when designer was loading.  This COM object was accessible from the main thread only, and prevented parallelization in source code processing. Also it did not support some of the newer language features, for example the `nameof()` expression. We are planning to build upon this foundation in the future releases. Code behind generated by the older releases can be loaded into Preview 3 or later and will work as expected. Code behind generated by Preview 3 can be loaded in the previous releases of the Visual Studio, but we are considering generating newer languages features that are not supported by the previous versions.  

Author: I re-phrased this paragraph and used it as a summary.

> Up until Visual Studio 2022 v17.5 Preview 3,  COM-based CodeModel interfaces ([CodeModel Interface (EnvDTE) | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/envdte.codemodel?view=visualstudiosdk-2022)) were used to write code into the editor's buffer as well as to generate CodeDOM from the source code when designer was loading.  This COM object was accessible from the main thread only, and prevented parallelization in source code processing. Also it did not support some of the newer language features, for example the `nameof()` expression. We are planning to build upon this foundation in the future releases. Code behind generated by the older releases can be loaded into Preview 3 or later and will work as expected. Code behind generated by Preview 3 can be loaded in the previous releases of the Visual Studio, but we are considering generating newer languages features that are not supported by the previous versions.  

Reviewer 2: We don't use such link decoration anywhere else - neither in docs or blogs.

> Starting with [Visual Studio 2022 v17.5 Preview 3](microsoft.com)](<https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/preview/>), WinForms Out of Process Designer uses [Roslyn](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn) for design time serialization.

Author: Took the capitalization change.

## Wins

* The use of Roslyn unblocks multithreaded serialization and deserialization to solve performance delays in designer load and unload scenarios.
* Code behind generation now respects `.editorconfig` settings and thus matches code style in the source files.

> * If developer enables implicit usings feature in the project properties, this option is respected by the code generation.

Author: ok

* Further modernization of code in .designer files is unblocked now.

> * Newly generated code be compatible with modern Roslyn analyzers.

Author: 👍

## Expected code-behind changes after the first design time serialization

> While `InitializeComponent` method is meant for the designer use only, and we don't support manual modifications to this method, you might see some changes in Form1.designer.cs and Form1.designer.vb  files in the source control tools. We have a one-time solution for this code churn.

Author: `don't support` implies that it might or might not work, seems fine to me.

> While `InitializeComponent` method is meant for the designer use only, and we don't support manual modifications to this method, you might see some changes in Form1.designer.cs and Form1.designer.vb  files in the source control tools. We have a one-time solution for this code churn.

Reviewer 3: My concern with not being able to edit Form1.Designer.vb as currently the designer has a bad habit of silently deleting custom controls. What is the best way to make sure the designer does not silently delete stuff including Handler clauses and initialization of the object. It does not delete "Friend With Events VariableName" statement so you only find out about the delete at runtime. Also the current designer tends to use local variables for some control objects list styles, Legends, Titles, and other stull but I want them to be Friend with Events variables, so I need to edit designer file. For Resources there is a dropdown to handle this but not for Designer. I am not using this to report a bug that was done with feedback this is specific to the issue of not editing the designer.vb file.

> While `InitializeComponent` method is meant for the designer use only, and we don't support manual modifications to this method, you might see some changes in Form1.designer.cs and Form1.designer.vb  files in the source control tools. We have a one-time solution for this code churn.

Author: All code inside `InitializeComponent` is a generated code. I don't think I need to specify that.

> For example, you will see changes to code behind in the new projects, until we update the templates. When a new WinForms application targeting .NET 8.0 is created, its `InitializeComponent` method looks like this:

Author: Thanks.

```cs
private void InitializeComponent()
{
    this.components = new System.ComponentModel.Container();
    this.AutoScaleMode = System.Windows.Forms.AutoScaleMode.Font;
    this.ClientSize = new System.Drawing.Size(800, 450);
    this.Text = "Form1";
}
```

![Form1.Designer.cs as created by the new project](../images/Form1-designer-from-template.png).

> Note that source code uses `this` access qualifier(`this.components`) as well as namespace-qualified type(`System.ComponentModel.Container();`) names. The namespace names are present because `using` directives were not generated in the past and design time serialization didn't not read [implicit usings](https://www.hanselman.com/blog/implicit-usings-in-net-6) property, available in .NET 6.0 for C#, and always for VB, from the project file:

Author: I took `the this` change, the rest is already re-phrased

```cs
private void InitializeComponent()
{
    button1 = new Button();
    SuspendLayout();
    // 
    // button1
    // 
    button1.Location = new Point(25, 32);
    button1.Name = "button1";
    button1.Size = new Size(75, 23);
    button1.TabIndex = 0;
    button1.Text = "button1";
    button1.UseVisualStyleBackColor = true;
    // 
    // Form1
    // 
    AutoScaleDimensions = new SizeF(7F, 15F);
    AutoScaleMode = AutoScaleMode.Font;
    ClientSize = new Size(163, 158);
    Controls.Add(button1);
    Name = "Form1";
    Text = "Form1";
    ResumeLayout(false);
}
```

![Form1.Designer.cs as generated by Roslyn](../images/Form1-Designer-re-generated.png)

Changes

* `this` access qualifier is removed, because I used default style settings in my Visual Studio, and the default is to omit `this`. Other `Code Style` preferences will be applied as well.
* Namespace names are removed from the type names. Namespaces are not needed because implicit usings are enabled for this project and the relevant namespaces are already referenced. 
* Initialization for an unused field(`components`) is removed!

> To control code style, like presence of access qualifiers, edit `.editorconfig` file:

Reviewer 4: I think there is too much information here on how to change settings. All we should have are documentation links and a sample showing that you can change specific settings only for `[*.Designer.cs]` files if you want to.

Reviewer: For broader reach we were considering also publishing this in the .NET Blogs. In that case, would it still be more information that you'd recommend? We could have the more robust blog post and this being the key technical information devs in our repo will want to have on hand.

Reviewer 2: Agree with @JeremyKuhne.

Author: >I think there is too much information here on how to change settings.

The point was to show where the changes are coming from.

Reviewer 5: I personally don't mind small examples once in while in place, as long as we reference the actual docs. All this info will often be very new for our target audience, so they will be having an easier time, reading it and not being interrupting by jumping to necessary links.

> * `this` access qualifier is removed, because I used default style settings in my Visual Studio, and the default is to omit `this`. Other `Code Style` preferences will be applied as well.

Author: this will be a blog.

> * `this` access qualifier is removed, because I used default style settings in my Visual Studio, and the default is to omit `this`. Other `Code Style` preferences will be applied as well.

Author: I tested common scenarios in intializeComponent. Namespaces don't quite work for the VB. 
`Me` is covered in `Similar changes are present in Visual Basic` section in the new PR.

> * Namespace names are removed from the type names. Namespaces are not needed because implicit usings are enabled for this project and the relevant namespaces are already referenced.
> * Initialization for an unused field(`components`) is removed!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Namespace names were removed from the type names. Namespaces were not needed because the implicit usings were enabled for this project and the relevant namespaces were already referenced.
* Initialization for an unused field (i.e., `components`) was removed.
```

> To control code style, like presence of access qualifiers, edit `.editorconfig` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To control the code style, like presence of access qualifiers, edit [`.editorconfig` file](https://learn.microsoft.com/visualstudio/ide/create-portable-custom-editor-options):
```

```ini
# C# files
[*.cs]

# this. and Me. preferences
dotnet_style_qualification_for_event = false
dotnet_style_qualification_for_field = false
dotnet_style_qualification_for_method = false
dotnet_style_qualification_for_property = false
```

> Settings can be also modified in the Visual Studio, go to Tools->Options menu (Alt+T; O), select Text Editor-> C# -> Code Style, and define your preferences:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The settings can be also modified in the Visual Studio, go to Tools->Options menu (Alt+T; O), select Text Editor-> C# -> Code Style, and define your preferences:
```

Author: changed to `Code style settings`

![Do not prefer this in Tools-Options-TextEditor-CodeStyle page](../images/Tools-Options-TextEditor-CodeStyle-Dialog.png)

> Read more about editor settings [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/visualstudio/ide/create-portable-custom-editor-options?view=vs-2022).

Reviewer 2: With the link above, this can probably be omitted.

Author: Well, it will shorten this post, but I prefer link descriptions that explain where the link will go. The below link might to a sample file or to the docs

>To preserve legacy code generation style, like presence of access qualifiers, edit [.editorconfig file](https://learn.microsoft.com/visualstudio/ide/create-portable-custom-editor-options).

To generate namespace names, you can disable `implicit usings` property in the project file, however that would affect source code in all files.

> You will see similar updates in the VB projects. To demonstrate them, I created a new VB WinForms project targeting .NET 8, and changed form size in the designer. `InitializeComponent`, before the change, uses `Me` qualifier and namespace names.

Reviewer 2: As above - the use of personal language.

Author: This will be a blog

Reviewer 5: > This will be a blog

Not sure, what that means. Personal language would still sound a bit weird.

Author: I mean that there is no guidance what person to narrate from for blogs

```vb
<System.Diagnostics.DebuggerStepThrough()> _
    Private Sub InitializeComponent()
        components = New System.ComponentModel.Container
        Me.AutoScaleMode = System.Windows.Forms.AutoScaleMode.Font
        Me.ClientSize = New System.Drawing.Size(800, 450)
        Me.Text = "Form2"
    End Sub
```

After the resize change is saved, code is re-generated :

```vb
 <System.Diagnostics.DebuggerStepThrough()> _
    Private Sub InitializeComponent()
        SuspendLayout()
        ' 
        ' Form2
        ' 
        AutoScaleDimensions = New SizeF(10.0F, 25.0F)
        AutoScaleMode = AutoScaleMode.Font
        ClientSize = New Size(223, 199)
        Name = "Form2"
        Text = "Form2"
        ResumeLayout(False)
    End Sub
```

![Form2.Designer.vb code updates](../images/Form2-Designer-VB-changes.png)

> Code style, for example, `Me.` qualifier, is controlled by .`editorconfig`, the same values, but under the VB language header.

Reviewer 2: This sentence has a confusing amount of commas.
```suggestion
Similar to C# language, VB code styles can be encoded in `.editorconfig` under the VB language header:
```

```ini
# Visual Basic files
[*.vb]

# this. and Me. preferences
dotnet_style_qualification_for_event = true
dotnet_style_qualification_for_field = true
dotnet_style_qualification_for_method = true
dotnet_style_qualification_for_property = true
```

> But presence of namespace names is controlled in the project properties differently. And can't be fully compatible with the previously generated code.The default set of namespace names for WinForms applications is omitted from the project file. `ImportedNamespaces` property is added to the project file only after the set is modified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the presence of namespace names is controlled in the project properties differently. And it can't be fully compatible with the previously generated code. The default set of namespace names for WinForms applications is omitted from the project file. `ImportedNamespaces` property is added to the project file only after the set is modified.
```

Author: mostly removed this paragraph.

```xml
  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>WinExe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net8.0-windows</TargetFramework>
    <StartupObject>Sub Main</StartupObject>
    <UseWindowsForms>true</UseWindowsForms>
    <MyType>WindowsForms</MyType>
    <ImportedNamespaces>System.Data=False,System.Drawing=False;System.Windows.Forms=False,Microsoft.VisualBasic=True,System=True,System.Collections=True,System.Collections.Generic=True,System.Diagnostics=True,System.Linq=True,System.Xml.Linq=True,System.Threading.Tasks=True,WinFormsApp40=True</ImportedNamespaces>
  </PropertyGroup>
```

> This set should be edited in the Visual Studio only, select application name in solution explorer, right click on it and select properties (Alt+Enter). Then select References->General tab. When `System.Drawing` namespace is unchecked in this page, designer will generate partial namespace name, `Drawing`. `System` namespace is always referenced, so it is omitted from the type name in the new designer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This set should be edited in the Visual Studio only. To do that:
* select application name in solution explorer, 
* right click on it and select properties (<kbd>Alt+Enter</kbd>),
* select References->General tab. 

When `System.Drawing` namespace is unchecked in this page, designer will generate partial namespace name, `Drawing`. `System` namespace is always referenced, so it is omitted from the type name in the new designer.
```

Author: Took `<kbd>` tag, not the bullet list, I don't want to emphasize these steps.

![Import Namespaces property for VB projects](../images/Form2-Designer-VB-ImportNamespaces-setting.png)

> Similarly, generated code will change when the same project is opened and modified by different versions of the Visual Studio. The new generated code can be opened by the previous version of the designer. To keep code style consistent between different version of the Visual Studio, update the `.editorconfig` file, however, we recommend upgrading environment to the latest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, the generated code will change when the same project is opened and modified by different versions of the Visual Studio. The new generated code can be opened by the previous version of the designer. To keep code style consistent between different version of the Visual Studio, update the `.editorconfig` file, however, we recommend upgrading environment to the latest.
```

Author: reworded this paragraph.
